the
world as the war in Gaza enters its
third week many are alarmed about the
impact it could have on the occupied
West Bank and on Palestinians living in
Israeli occupied
territories while Gaza is governed by
Hamas the occupied West Bank is governed
by the Palestinian Authority led by
fat
both factions want an independent
Palestinian State however the struggle
for self-determination and autonomy has
substantial historical
differences unlike Hamas the Palestinian
Authority recognizes Israel and while
the relations between the occupied West
Bank and Israel are not exactly friendly
there has been a certain level of
cooperation but how will the Hamas
offensive on Southern Israel on October
7th and Israel's war on Gaza change the
nature of this relationship and will a
further escalation of the conflict
result in both the Palestinian Authority
and Hamas putting aside their
differences and joining forces the
Palestinian prime minister Muhammad stya
talks to Al
jaaz Palestinian prime minister Muhammad
thank you for talking to Al jazer thank
you the war in Gaza is in a third week
and there's increasing pressure on you
not only to condemn the attack but also
to take a stand against Hamas what's
your position on that this war has been
declared on the Palestinian people long
time before October 7th and uh those who
ask for these sort of things they don't
know Palestinian reality Palestinians
are united under these terrible
conditions and what we have seen in Gaza
we have been seeing it in the West West
Bank as well more than 102 Palestinians
have been killed since October 7th and
thousands of Palestinians have been
killed in the West Bank as well in
Janine and tarim in hion in Jerusalem
Bim and everywhere so Palestinians these
days they're all under attack but why
did it take so long for the Palestinian
Authority to react the world was already
shocked at what happened on October 7th
world leaders were issued issuing
statements and the Palestinian Authority
remained silent why no we did not stay
silent because we were conducting a very
uh active uh condensed intensified
diplomatic activities in order for us to
stop the aggression immediately yet it
took the bombing of Al Ali Hospital in
Raza where hundreds of Palestinians died
for the president to return from Jordan
cut short his visit there and finally
appear on TV speaking to the Palestinian
people isn't that a bit too late no the
issue is what we care for is results
really the issue is not only to talk to
the media the issue is what is more
important is that the president from day
one he has been conducting phone calls
visits he was everywhere and he spoke to
everybody in order for us to create an
international front to stop the Act and
the aggression against our people in
Gaza and until now we are calling for an
immediate cessation of fire so that the
people will have a chance to even take
their dead out of the rebels to cure the
injured and provide fuel for the
hospitals and so on so our target has
been fully focused from day one and
during those first few hours or few days
has there been any contact with the
Israeli side considering that the
security coordination I think is still
ongoing on the contrary we totally did
freeze any security coordination with
the Israelis not because of this much
time before so therefore there has not
been really any contacts with the
Israelis under any circumstances all the
contacts has been channeled through
United States Europe the Arab countries
and so on so we are conducting a very
intensified diplomatic uh Mission okay
but
concretely Palestinian Authority is here
in the occupied West Bank it is
geographically separated from Gaza and
there is no way to reach Gaza from from
here so apart from calling for ceasefire
for humanitarian corridors for safe
places what can you
do it's not what can we do what we have
been doing we have been doing a lot our
relationship with Gaza has nothing to do
with the separation of geography we have
been in charge of Gaza for the last 30
years even during the time that Hamas
has taken over Gaza in 2007 we have been
responsible for Education we have been
responsible for health we have been
responsible for water for electricity we
paid the salaries we PID the bills so
our relationship with Gaza never stopped
so we these people are our people we
don't do them a favor Palestinians are
one wherever they are now what is
installed in east of kanun we are
providing medical supplies through uh
the Red Cross and we have been also
providing financial assistance through
uh wfp we were working with them and we
are working also I we have three
ministers today who are locked in Gaza
and they are doing very all what they
should do as ministers in this
government they are visiting Hospital
they're they're and looking at needs
they're providing us of the needs and we
are working accordingly so therefore
it's not that we are doing diplomatic
work as a software but also we are
providing every assistance that we can
do we are daily in touch with our
Egyptian colleagues in order for us to
reconnect electricity from Egypt to Rafa
do you think it's enough considering
that every day hundreds are dying in
Gaza hundreds of adults hundreds of
children do you think what you're doing
is an enough of course not the enough is
for us to stop the aggression against
our people and that's not 100% in our
hands but we are working with all those
who want to see a peaceful Gaza a
peaceful Palestine we're working with
the International Community that as I
told you it's very unfortunate that
these International leaders who have
been really making statements in support
of Israel they did not make any
statement to call upon Israel to stop
its aggression against our people in
Gaza you mentioned Palestinian Unity
several times so far that might be true
at the street level but at the political
level there have been bitter divisions
all the way back since
2006 and they have you've never been
able to reconcile between Hamas and
fat don't you bear also responsibility
somehow for what's happening in Gaza
don't you think you gave a wind of
opportunity for Israel to do whatever it
wants no the Israelis the Israeli
attacks on Gaza has been systematic the
Israeli attacks on Palestinians wherever
they are has been systematic but the
ones on Gaza have been systematic ever
since that these these divisions exist
no not much more before of course it is
it's a very sad situation in which
Palestinian reality and Palestinians are
not united we did every single effort we
did sign Four Agreements uh in order for
us to bring Palestinian Unity and the
dialogue is still ongoing I don't want
to go it is not the time to go into a
blame game now the priority today for us
is that we stand United with our people
and We Stand United to stop the war and
We Stand United to relieve our people
this is the most important thing at this
stage I'm not going to go into the blame
game who's responsible for not making
the Palestinian Unity achievable that's
a different story but I am sure that
after this situation there is no room
under any circumstances for a
continuation of the split this is a
situation that does dictate itself on
ourselves that the Palestinians should
be United so does that mean that after
this is over the Palestinian Authority
will also look a bit inwards and see how
it could change because there's a lot of
complaints even here in the occupied
West Bank people are criticizing you and
I'm sure you're aware of that
the situation in the West Bank is very
dangerous situation the issue is not
about criticizing us or not the reality
is very tough this is a situation in
which you see the Israeli Army
encourging into the Palestinian towns
Palestinian Villages Palestinian cities
every single day
985 Palestinians have been arrested and
even more than a thousand the other
issue is that the Israeli colonization
programs have intensified the number of
settlers today in the Palestinian
territory is more than
750,000 and it's growing every single
day land confiscation the incremental
annexation of certain areas the W around
Jerusalem the incursion into Alamos so
all these Israeli acts the the deduction
of our money every single thing that is
people that they feel in the street we
feel it as well the issue is not that
the Palestinian people are on one side
and the Palestinian leadership on the
other we are not because we and our
people are under attack and
Netanyahu strategy has been designed to
fully and totally isolate Gaza and to
gradually and incrementally Annex the
West Bank because netanyahu's strategy
has always been to kill every
possibility of a future Palestinian
State okay but you still haven't
answered my question the people have
been complaining have been frustrated
with the Palestinian Authority I'm sure
you're aware of that especially that
half of the population here in the
occupied West Bank is below 25 those are
the ones who risk their lives those are
the ones who go to clashes those are the
ones who are targeted by uh Israel
during the nightly raids and during all
what's
happening do you think that somehow you
have failed them that's something you
haven't done enough not to protect them
not at all the the issue is
that there is an occupying
Army and as I said we are under
occupation and the Palestinian Authority
as an organ of the National Liberation
movement the BL the different political
factions we fight every day Palestinians
have been resisting in the West Bank of
course the blo and different political
factions has ad have adopted peaceful
resistance all over over the years but
obviously the Israelis they don't
understand this the Israeli Machine
Killing machine does not know a peaceful
demonstration or whatever the Israeli
government has actually changed Rules of
Engagement and therefore it's not that
the Palestinian people are frustrated
this situation is a situation in which
one can call extremely dangerous in the
West Bank and genocide in Gaza and when
the Palestinians are under attack it's
all of Palestine is under attack so we
are all Angry we are all for one and and
everyone is for all and that when we
speak about defending our farmers who
are collecting olive trees we are facing
the settler terrorist attacks and also
we have formed committees to defend
people in The Villages and the refugee
camp in the cities and so on so we are
doing every single every possible way
our president has been at the United
Nation more than once calling for
international protection for the
Palestinian people so these are things
that we have been doing here of course
Gaza is not under occupation was not
Gaza was under siege for the last 17
years it's a very difficult situation
and therefore Palestinians as I said we
are doing everything that can be done
under the current situation to protect
our people the issue is not only what
the Palestinian Authority is doing it's
what we are doing all together and I
think we are doing what every possible
that we can do to save the lives of our
kids our children our women and so on so
if it's what the Palestinians are doing
together the political leadership is
doing together why is there always a
need each statement to say that only the
PLO the Palestinian Liberation
Organization represents the Palestinian
people that excludes many political fact
actions so why is there a need to always
underline that because the issue is the
issue is not about excluding or
including the the blo has been the sole
legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people and The blo Wanted
and open dialogue with Hamas and Islamic
Jihad so that they will be included
within the blo is an organization that's
a coalition of all different factions
and the blo has a 13 different factions
and therefore Hamas has always been
invited to join the the pl Islamic Jihad
has been invited to join the PLO of
course you need
dialogue and you need to agree on what
are the the uh what is the political
program what is the struggle program
what are the different program so that
we agree on one unified front based on a
political agenda otherwise everybody
will be shooting somebody will be
shooting left somebody should will be
shooting right no one can make peace
alone
and no one can make war alone we have to
be United and decide together to go to
war and decide together to go to beace
whenever any of these is possible
looking
forward Israel says it will carry out a
ground incursion we don't know when
yet the military also said that it's
taking its gloves off when it comes to
the occupied West bank and going after
Hamas uh across the West
Bank and in all of this President Biden
is actually
doubting the number of casualties coming
out uh of the uh Ministry of Health on a
daily base he says that there
Palestinians are inflating that but with
looking ahead there be more and more
casualties what's your response to when
President Biden puts in question what
you say well look
first of all the numbers that comes out
of number of Palestinian killed are
numbers of the Palestinian Ministry of
Health our Ministry of Health because we
are in charge of the health sector in
all of Gaza in the same way that we are
in charge of the health sector in uh the
West Bank and Jerusalem as well so the
numbers are our numbers of course we
take the numbers from the director
general of the hospitals in in in in
Gaza and then they released the some
numbers we do but to question this
number is just for some people to
relieve themselves from a humanitarian
responsibility because what is happening
in Gaza is numbers are unbelievable so
people don't want to believe what is
already the magnitude of disaster and
the number of Palestinians who have been
killed people don't want to believe the
thousands of children and women who have
been killed people there are certain
leaders who don't want to see reality
they only want to see what is happening
on the Israeli side they don't want to
see what is happening on the Palestinian
side so therefore the numbers are
correct they are our numbers these
numbers are fed to us from the hospitals
of Gaza every single day that are
received by our Ministry of Health so
therefore this situation I think if they
can ask the United Nation united nation
has a station there in Gaza the United
Nation can verify every single number of
Palestinians who are there there are
thousands of people who are still no
more around a thousand people who are
still under the rebels there are
Palestinians who have been killed who
crossed into Israel they they're they're
there and we don't know the numbers of
them yet I'm asking you this because at
the same time
while President Biden is putting into
question these numbers the Us and other
Western countries including France
president Emmanuel macron are calling
for the peace process to be revived at
the end of this
war there will be many more dead there
will be much more destruction do you
think that's even possible after all
this
suffering business is
unusual and this peace process Israel
has killed it quite some time ago so to
speak about peace process it means a
more prolonged
attacks and uh giving Israel more time
to act I think what is needed Now by
these leaders to call upon Israel to
stop the war and to stop the aggression
and to stop the atrocities and to stop
the massive killing of our people that
is what is needed those who want to
think of the day after they should think
of one thing that Israel should be
called upon to end its occupation that
has occurred on the Palestinian
territory since 1967 including Jerusalem
that is what these people should be
calling for but to call for a beast
process is very fluid statement the
Beast process there there is a process
there was no beace there was a beast
there was no process today there is no
Beast there is no process so there
should be one thing which is call abon
Israel to end occupation in accordance
with United Nation resolutions and in
accordance on the basis of international
law things does not need negotiations
things need an International decision by
the White House by Europe to call upon
Israel to put a program to end its
occupation to the Palestinian territory
these are not matters of negotiations
these are matter of withdrawal of the
Israeli Army withdraw of settlers who
have been a cause of very dangerous
situation and the settlers have been
conducting terrorist act against our
people and killing number of
Palestinians innocent Palestinians in
their home so therefore the call of
peace process the time is now let's not
look at the day after I want to look at
today and today for me is end of
aggression and not allow Israel to uh
conduct a ground operation or encourging
into Gaza because that will cause
thousands of Palestinians to die and to
be killed and massacred and also
Israelis will be victims as well even if
there's a ceasefire today 7,000 people
have already died and there's pressure
on you as the Palestinian Authority to
think about the day after as you call it
uh it's the first time we hear in years
Western leaders talk about a two-state
solution that had been gone would you be
able to turn to the Palestinian people
whether here in the occupied West Bank
or in Gaza and tell them after all this
let's talk
peace after all
this we should sit down and unify our
front as
Palestinians and I think after this
there will be no excuse whatsoever for a
continuation of a split after this
Palestinians have to stand United in the
same way our people are united political
factions are not United but I think we
have made every single concession and
compromise to allow a Palestinian
Palestinian uh reconciliation and unity
and our president us behind him we are
all calling for this to happen one
second important issue we have been in
charge of Gaza for all these 30 years so
we are providing every service for Gaza
if there is no Unity at the political
top but there is unity in the structure
in the service in and in the people you
know Palestinians in Gaza they get get
this passports from here birth
certificates from here medical treatment
from here School textbooks from here so
we brought provide and we have been
providing all of this for Gaza so there
we one the structure and so on and so
forth all what is needed is that we
together at the political level come
together and unite one secondly all
these sort of atrocities it will repeat
itself if there will be no political
agenda political Horizon that is
designed to end occupation because there
are people who want wanted to manifest
occupation rather than ending it and so
the political track should lead to one
thing which is ending occupation the
manifestation of a Palestinian State on
the borders of B of of 67 as a
contiguous sther viable state of
Palestine that includes West Bank and CA
there are people who are suggesting some
sort of political track for Gaza or some
political track for the West Bank that
is totally unacceptable to us we are not
for partial Solutions we are for a
comprehensive solution that does
consider IND occupation and the
materialization and of a sovereign
independent Palestinian state that 140
countries in the world have recognized
at the United Nation so therefore that
what our main concern is today end of
aggression against our people the day
after is something that we can look at
together with all Palestinian political
faction and my last question we we don't
know when that ceasefire will
come but after that what kind of Gaza
will emerge will Hamas still be there
will Hamas still be in charge how will
the people of
razza come out of all of this for
us the sadness of what we have seen
beside that we cry for the dead the
children the women families have been
totally wiped taken out of the Civil
registar families 44 me you know when
people are under attack families come
together but where will Hamas be
Hamas is going is not going to be
finished if Israel thinks that they're
going to finish Hamas I think
that's a a miscalculation on their side
it's not going to happen Hamas is an
integral part of the Palestinian
political Arena whether the certain
capitals consider Hamas as a terrorist
organization not that's something to do
with them but Hamas is an integral part
of the Palestinian political Arena we
have been in dialogue with Hamas and as
I said Israel will not finish Hamas the
Hamas leadership is in in Qatar in
certain parts of the world and so on we
have seen this that has happened to us
in Beirut in
1982 Palestinian political forces have
been evacuated from Lebanon we lost a
geographic base but this did not end
neither fat nor all the blo factions
this will not end Hamas Palestinians
after this have to come to the voice of
reason and be United so that we have a
Rosy image we go to war together if need
to be and we go to Beast together if
need to be and I think the big lesson
that we should learn out of this is that
to continue be divided and split is
something that we is that is weakening
our cause and therefore we will invest
every effort to be United invest every
effort to make these sacrifices of our
people does not go with the wind but it
does bring Justice Freedom dignity
sovereign state of Palestine that all
Palestinians have been looking at
working for fighting for baying
sacrifices since 197
19448 until today Palestinian prime
minister Muhammad thank you very much
for talking to thank you so
[Music]
much